content/02.body.md, before:

## Introduction

### Node degree

![Degree figure](){#fig:degree width="100%"}

### Edge prediction

### Feature-degree correlation


## Methods

### Network permutation

Network permutation is a way to produce new networks by randomizing the connections of an existing network.
Specialized permutation strategies can be devised that permute networks while retaining chosen features.
Comparing between permuted and unpermuted networks gives insight to the effects of the retained network features.
For example, an edge prediction method that has superior reconstruction performance on a network compared to its permutations likely relies on information that is eliminated in permutation.
Conversely, identical predictive performance on true and permuted networks indicates that a method relies on information that is preserved during permutation.
Network permutation is a flexible framework for analyzing other methods, because it generates networks with identical formats to the original network.
We propose using network permutation to isolate degree and determine its effects in different contexts.
Degree-preserving network permutation obscures true connections and higher-order connectivity information while retaining node degree, and thereby, the network's degree sequence.
Thanks to the flexibility of permutation, our framework can quantify the effect of degree on any network edge prediction method.

### XSwap algorithm

Hanhijärvi, et al. presented XSwap [@doi:10.1137/1.9781611972795.67], an algorithm for the randomization ("permutation") of unweighted networks (Figure {@fig:algo}A).
The algorithm picks two existing edges at random, and if the edges constitute a valid swap, exchanges the targets between the edges (Figure {@fig:xswap}).

![Graphical representation of the XSwap algorithm applied to two edges.
The algorithm preserves both the source- and target-degree for all nodes.](images/xswap_figure.png){#fig:xswap width="50%"}

To allow greater flexibility, we modified the algorithm by adding two parameters, "`allow_self_loops`", and "`allow_antiparallel`" that allow a greater variety of network types to be permuted (Figure {@fig:algo}B).
Specifically, two chosen edges constitute a valid swap if they preserve degree for all four involved nodes and do not violate the above condition options.
The motivation for these generalizations is to make the permutation method applicable both to directed and undirected graphs, as well as to networks with different types of nodes, variously called multipartite, heterogeneous, or multimodal networks.
We provide documentation for parameter choices depending on the type of network being permuted in the GitHub repository (https://github.com/hetio/xswap).
The original algorithm and our proposed modification are given in Figure {@fig:algo}.

![
  **A.** XSwap algorithm due to Hanhijärvi, et al. [@doi:10.1137/1.9781611972795.67].
  **B.** Proposed modification to XSwap algorithm](images/xswap_algos.png){#fig:algo width="100%"}

### Edge prior

We introduce the "edge prior" to quantify the probability that two nodes are connected based only on their degree.
The edge prior can be estimated using the maximum likelihood estimate for the binomial distribution success probability--the fraction of permuted networks in which a given edge exists.
Based only on permuted networks, the edge prior does not contain any information about the true edges in the (unpermuted) network.
The edge prior is a numerical feature that can be computed for each node pair in a network, and we compared its ability to predict edges in three tasks, discussed below.

### Edge prior approximation

We also considered the possibility that the probability of an edge existing across permuted networks could be written as a closed form equation involving the node pair's degree.
We were unable to find a closed-form solution giving the edge prior without assuming independent node pairs, which we believe is incorrect for XSwap.
Nonetheless, we discovered a good approximation to the edge prior for networks with many nodes and relatively low edge density.

Let $m$ be the total number of edge in the network, and $d(u_i)$, $d(v_j)$ be the source and target degrees of a node pair, respectively.
A good approximation of the edge prior is given by the following:
\begin{equation}
    P_{i,j} = \frac{d(u_i) d(v_j)}{\sqrt{(d(u_i) d(v_j))^2 + (m - d(u_i) - d(v_j) + 1)^2}}
\end{equation}

Further discussion of this approximate edge prior and an derivation are available in [the supplement](#approx-prior-supp).

### Prediction tasks

We performed three prediction tasks to assess the performance of the edge prior.
We compared the permutation-based prior with two additional features: a scaled product of source and target degree (scaled to the range [0, 1]) and our approximation of the edge prior.
We used 20 biomedical networks from the Hetionet heterogeneous network [@doi:10.7554/eLife.26726] that had at least 2000 edges for the first two tasks.
In the first task, we computed the degree-based prediction features (edge prior, scaled degree product, and prior approximation), and predicted the original edges in the network.
We used node pairs that lacked edge in the original network as negative examples.
To assess the methods' predictive performances, we computed the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for all three features.
In the second task, we sampled 70% of edges from each of the networks, computed features on the sampled network, then attempted to predict held-out edges.
For this task, negative examples were node pairs in which an edge did not exist in either original or sampled network, while positive samples were those node pairs without an edge in the sampled network but with an edge in the original network.

The third task evaluated the ability of the edge prior to generalize to new degree distributions.
We used two domains---protein-protein interactions (PPI) and transcription factor-target gene (TF-TG) relationships---where networks were available that were generated through different methods: literature curation of low-throughput, hypothesis-driven research and high-throughput, systematic, hypothesis-free experimentation.
For the PPI networks, we used the STRING network, which incorporates literature-mining to find relationships [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky1131] and a combination of the high-throughput, proteome-scale interaction networks from Rual et al. [@doi:10.1038/nature04209] and Rolland et al. [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.050].
We used a transcription factor-target gene (TF-TG) literature-derived network from Han et al. [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1013] and a high-throughput network from Lachmann et al. [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq466].
The pairs of networks for PPI and TF-TG data sources are ideal because in one we expect inspection bias and in the other we do not.

As a further basis of comparison, we added a time-resolved co-authorship network, which we partitioned by time to create two separate networks.
We created the co-authorship network of bioRxiv preprints using the Rxivist [@doi:10.1101/515643; @doi:10.5281/zenodo.2566421] database, which was generated by crawling the bioRxiv server.
Unlike the other two, the co-authorship network does not have degree bias, as the network faithfully represents all true co-author relationships.
We include this network to offer a comparative prediction task in which the degree distributions between training (posted before 2018) and testing (posted during or after 2018) do not differ (Figure {@fig:degree-bias}A).
The goal of the third prediction task is to determine feature generalizability for network reconstruction between different degree distributions, especially predicting a network without degree bias using features from a degree-biased network.
Further information about the networks used can be found in [the supplement](#networks).

### Degree-grouping

### Implementation and source code


## Results

![Discrimination figure](){#fig:discrimination width="100%"}

![Calibration figure](){#fig:calibration width="100%"}

## Discussion


## Conclusion

Commit message:

Split sentence and mention positive examples

content/02.body.md, after:

## Introduction

### Node degree

![Degree figure](){#fig:degree width="100%"}

### Edge prediction

### Feature-degree correlation


## Methods

### Network permutation

Network permutation is a way to produce new networks by randomizing the connections of an existing network.
Specialized permutation strategies can be devised that permute networks while retaining chosen features.
Comparing between permuted and unpermuted networks gives insight to the effects of the retained network features.
For example, an edge prediction method that has superior reconstruction performance on a network compared to its permutations likely relies on information that is eliminated in permutation.
Conversely, identical predictive performance on true and permuted networks indicates that a method relies on information that is preserved during permutation.
Network permutation is a flexible framework for analyzing other methods, because it generates networks with identical formats to the original network.
We propose using network permutation to isolate degree and determine its effects in different contexts.
Degree-preserving network permutation obscures true connections and higher-order connectivity information while retaining node degree, and thereby, the network's degree sequence.
Thanks to the flexibility of permutation, our framework can quantify the effect of degree on any network edge prediction method.

### XSwap algorithm

Hanhijärvi, et al. presented XSwap [@doi:10.1137/1.9781611972795.67], an algorithm for the randomization ("permutation") of unweighted networks (Figure {@fig:algo}A).
The algorithm picks two existing edges at random, and if the edges constitute a valid swap, exchanges the targets between the edges (Figure {@fig:xswap}).

![Graphical representation of the XSwap algorithm applied to two edges.
The algorithm preserves both the source- and target-degree for all nodes.](images/xswap_figure.png){#fig:xswap width="50%"}

To allow greater flexibility, we modified the algorithm by adding two parameters, "`allow_self_loops`", and "`allow_antiparallel`" that allow a greater variety of network types to be permuted (Figure {@fig:algo}B).
Specifically, two chosen edges constitute a valid swap if they preserve degree for all four involved nodes and do not violate the above condition options.
The motivation for these generalizations is to make the permutation method applicable both to directed and undirected graphs, as well as to networks with different types of nodes, variously called multipartite, heterogeneous, or multimodal networks.
We provide documentation for parameter choices depending on the type of network being permuted in the GitHub repository (https://github.com/hetio/xswap).
The original algorithm and our proposed modification are given in Figure {@fig:algo}.

![
  **A.** XSwap algorithm due to Hanhijärvi, et al. [@doi:10.1137/1.9781611972795.67].
  **B.** Proposed modification to XSwap algorithm](images/xswap_algos.png){#fig:algo width="100%"}

### Edge prior

We introduce the "edge prior" to quantify the probability that two nodes are connected based only on their degree.
The edge prior can be estimated using the maximum likelihood estimate for the binomial distribution success probability--the fraction of permuted networks in which a given edge exists.
Based only on permuted networks, the edge prior does not contain any information about the true edges in the (unpermuted) network.
The edge prior is a numerical feature that can be computed for each node pair in a network, and we compared its ability to predict edges in three tasks, discussed below.

### Edge prior approximation

We also considered the possibility that the probability of an edge existing across permuted networks could be written as a closed form equation involving the node pair's degree.
We were unable to find a closed-form solution giving the edge prior without assuming independent node pairs, which we believe is incorrect for XSwap.
Nonetheless, we discovered a good approximation to the edge prior for networks with many nodes and relatively low edge density.

Let $m$ be the total number of edge in the network, and $d(u_i)$, $d(v_j)$ be the source and target degrees of a node pair, respectively.
A good approximation of the edge prior is given by the following:
\begin{equation}
    P_{i,j} = \frac{d(u_i) d(v_j)}{\sqrt{(d(u_i) d(v_j))^2 + (m - d(u_i) - d(v_j) + 1)^2}}
\end{equation}

Further discussion of this approximate edge prior and an derivation are available in [the supplement](#approx-prior-supp).

### Prediction tasks

We performed three prediction tasks to assess the performance of the edge prior.
We compared the permutation-based prior with two additional features: a scaled product of source and target degree (scaled to the range [0, 1]) and our approximation of the edge prior.
We used 20 biomedical networks from the Hetionet heterogeneous network [@doi:10.7554/eLife.26726] that had at least 2000 edges for the first two tasks.
In the first task, we computed the degree-based prediction features (edge prior, scaled degree product, and prior approximation), and predicted the original edges in the network.
We used node pairs that lacked edge in the original network as negative examples and those with an edge as positive examples.
To assess the methods' predictive performances, we computed the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for all three features.
In the second task, we sampled 70% of edges from each of the networks, computed features on the sampled network, then attempted to predict held-out edges.
For this task, negative examples were node pairs in which an edge did not exist in either original or sampled network, while positive samples were those node pairs without an edge in the sampled network but with an edge in the original network.

The third task evaluated the ability of the edge prior to generalize to new degree distributions.
We used two domains where networks were available which shared nodes but had different degree distributions.
Protein-protein interactions (PPI) and transcription factor-target gene (TF-TG) relationships had networks created by literature curation of low-throughput, hypothesis-driven research and by high-throughput, systematic, hypothesis-free experimentation.
For the PPI networks, we used the STRING network, which incorporates literature-mining to find relationships [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky1131] and a combination of the high-throughput, proteome-scale interaction networks from Rual et al. [@doi:10.1038/nature04209] and Rolland et al. [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.050].
We used a transcription factor-target gene (TF-TG) literature-derived network from Han et al. [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1013] and a high-throughput network from Lachmann et al. [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq466].
The pairs of networks for PPI and TF-TG data sources are ideal because in one we expect inspection bias and in the other we do not.

As a further basis of comparison, we added a time-resolved co-authorship network, which we partitioned by time to create two separate networks.
We created the co-authorship network of bioRxiv preprints using the Rxivist [@doi:10.1101/515643; @doi:10.5281/zenodo.2566421] database, which was generated by crawling the bioRxiv server.
Unlike the other two, the co-authorship network does not have degree bias, as the network faithfully represents all true co-author relationships.
We include this network to offer a comparative prediction task in which the degree distributions between training (posted before 2018) and testing (posted during or after 2018) do not differ (Figure {@fig:degree-bias}A).
The goal of the third prediction task is to determine feature generalizability for network reconstruction between different degree distributions, especially predicting a network without degree bias using features from a degree-biased network.
Further information about the networks used can be found in [the supplement](#networks).

### Degree-grouping

### Implementation and source code


## Results

![Discrimination figure](){#fig:discrimination width="100%"}

![Calibration figure](){#fig:calibration width="100%"}

## Discussion


## Conclusion
